README.md, before:

zolaschool
==

Step 00
--

To start with zola the init command comes in handy:

```
zola init zolaschool
cd zolaschool
```

it creates the directory structure needed and a config file. I just pressed enter to use the default settings. After that i can run a server to deliver the pages with:

```
zola serve
```

if i visit [http://127.0.0.1:1111/](http://127.0.0.1:1111/) i read:

> To modify this page, create a index.html file in the templates directory

Step 01
--

So i did that:

```
cat > templates/index.html <<EOF
<h1>Something</h1>

EOF
```

and in the browser the page reloads without any intervention. Nice!

Step 02
--

Thats more or less static html serving - where does my content come in? The "index"-page is called `_index` in the content space:

```
cat > content/_index.md <<EOF
+++
title = "Anything"
+++
EOF
```

if i now adapt the template accordingly the title switches:

```
cat > templates/index.html <<EOF
<h1>{{ section.title }}</h1>
EOF
```

Step 03
--

More content files in the same directory are pages, the content is formulated in markdown with a meta data header surrounded by "+++". The syntax of the meta data is toml:

```
cat > content/nothing.md <<EOF
+++
title = "Nothing"
+++

Nothing
==

EOF
```

if i navigate to [http://127.0.0.1:1111/nothing](http://127.0.0.1:1111/nothing) zola tells me `page.html` is missing:

```
cat > templates/page.html <<EOF
<h1> {{ page.title }} </h1>
{{ page.content | safe }}

EOF
```

Which shows Nothing twice, once from the meta data `page.title`, another from the markdown part.

Step 04
--

Navigating back to the main page shows that i have no hint, that "Nothing" exists. I can add links to all pages in this directory. A directory is called "section" in zola. A section can contain multiple pages and we can iterate over those:

```
cat >> templates/index.html <<EOF
<h2>Pages:</h2>
<ul>
	{% for page in section.pages %}
		<li><a href="{{ page.permalink }}">{{ page.title }}</a></li>
	{% endfor %}
</ul>
```

Watching the browser shows that the "Nothing"-page shows up as an item in an unordered list.

Step 05
--

I want a subsection

```
mkdir content/things
cat > content/things/_index.md << EOF
+++
title = "Things"
+++

More things
--

EOF
```

The subsection doesnt show up as a page in "/" and manually navigating to [http://127.0.0.1:1111/things/](http://127.0.0.1:1111/things/) shows that section.html is missing:

```
cp templates/index.html templates/section.html
```

Step 06
--

The initial page doesnt show the subsections, we can add that ability:

```
cat >> templates/index.html <<EOF
<h2>Sections:</h2>
<ul>
	{% for subsection in section.subsections %}
		{% set sub = get_section(path=subsection, metadata_only=true) %}
		<li><a href="{{ sub.permalink | safe }}">{{ sub.title }}</a></li>
	{% endfor %}
</ul>
EOF
```

And i did the same for sections:

```
cat >> templates/section.html <<EOF
<h2>Sections:</h2>
<ul>
	{% for subsection in section.subsections %}
		{% set sub = get_section(path=subsection, metadata_only=true) %}
		<li><a href="{{ sub.permalink | safe }}">{{ sub.title }}</a></li>
	{% endfor %}
</ul>
EOF
```

Step 07
--

I can now add some more content:

```
cat > content/things/everything.md <<EOF
+++
title = "Everything"
+++

This is every thing
==

EOF
```

It will show up in [http://127.0.0.1:1111/things/](http://127.0.0.1:1111/things/).

Step 08
--

I want templates! This is the base for all my pages:

```
cat > templates/base.html <<EOF
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
	<head>
		<title>Thingieworld</title>
	</head>
	<body>
		<section>
			<div>
				{% block content %}
				{% endblock %}
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
EOF
```

Now i need to surround my html files with the extends & block commands:

```
for n in templates/index.html templates/page.html templates/section.html; do (
	echo '{% extends "base.html" %}'
	echo '{% block content %}'
	cat $n
	echo '{% endblock content %}' ) > x
	mv x $n
done
```

Step 09
--

I want some styling:

```
cat > sass/site.scss <<EOF
body {
	background-color: #444;
	color: #ccc;
	font-family: Lucida Console, Liberation Mono, DejaVu Sans Mono, monospace;
	padding: 2em;
	margin: 2em;
}

a {
	color: #e90;
}
EOF
```

Which is included by a headerline in templates/base.html:

```
<link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ get_url(path="site.css", trailing_slash=false) | safe }}">
```

Step 10
--

Special section / page handling is done when using _index or index files in a directory. An `_index` file denotes a subsection while an `index` file is just another page. A file like `a.md` is the same page as `a/index.md`. I created both cases:

```
mkdir content/a content/b
cat > content/a/index.md <<EOF
+++
title = "a"
+++
EOF
cat > content/b/_index.md <<EOF
+++
title = "b"
+++
EOF
```

The browser shows the links in different lists (i added header lines inbetween the lists for better visibility, see above).

Step 11
--

I enabled a taxonomy of "tags" in config by adding

```
taxonomies = [
	{name = "tags"},
]
```

into the main section of `config.toml`. Two templates to render taxonomies are needed:

```
cat > templates/taxonomy_single.html <<EOF
{% extends "base.html" %}
{% block content %}
	<h1>{{ term.name }}</h1>
	{% for page in term.pages %}
		<a href="{{ page.permalink | safe }}">{{ page.title }}</a>
	{% endfor %}
{% endblock content %}
EOF
cat > templates/taxonomy_list.html <<EOF
{% extends "index.html" %}
{% block content %}
	{% if terms %}
		{% for term in terms %}
			<p><a href="{{ term.permalink | safe }}">{{ term.name }}</a> ({{ term.pages | length }})</p>
		{% endfor %}
	{% endif %}
{% endblock content %}
EOF
```

and in `templates/page.html` i added a footer with the tags of that page:

```
<h2>Tags:</h2>
{% if page.taxonomies.tags %}
	{% for tag in page.taxonomies.tags %}
		<a href="{{ get_taxonomy_url(kind="tags", name=tag) | safe }}">{{ tag }}</a>
	{% endfor %}
{% endif %}
```

finally i added a taxonomy "tags" to `content/nothing.md` and `content/things/everything.md`:

```
[taxonomies]
tags = ["thing", "no"]
```

i added

```
	<a href="/tags/">all tags</a>
```

to `templates/index.html` and `templates/section.html` to be able to navigate to "taxonomy_list". I didnt find out a way to programmatically retrieve the url and thus hardcoded it to be "/tags/" (hints welcome).

Step 12
--

For search to work i enabled it in `config.toml`:

```
build_search_index = true
```

added `static/search.js` and `sass/_search.scss` from (https://github.com/getzola/zola/blob/master/docs/), added `@import "search";` to `sass/site.scss`. Finally i added the box to `templates/base.html`.

Step 13
--

I enabled code highlighting, this is straight forward in `config.toml`:

```
[markdown]
highlight_code = true
```

and adding a sample in `content/nothing.md`.

Step 14
--

I enabled feeds in `config.toml` with:

```
generate_feed = true
```

i did not see any entries (i even got a 404) without having a date like `date = "2022-01-22"` in one of the pages metadata. That correspondends to the doc and seems to be obvious. Auto detection if feeds can be achieved by the right header line in the html which i added to `templates/base.html`.

Step 15
--

The `robots.txt` can be templated and served from `templates/`.

Step 16
--

Adding a `templates/404.html` gives arbitrary Error-Pages.

Step 17
--

Themes arent themes :) - those are just base structures that can be overwritten by a site. Basically a theme is the same as a site, so i copied my site into a theme:

```
cd themes
zola init unthing
cd unthing
cat > theme.toml <<EOF
name = "unthing"
description = "A old school theme"
license = "MIT"
homepage = "https://codeberg.org/mdt/zolaschool"
min_version = "0.4.0"
demo = ""

[extra]

[author]
name = "My Self"
homepage = "https://me"

EOF
rmdir content
rm config.toml
cd ../..
mv static/* themes/unthing/static
mv sass/* themes/unthing/sass
mv templates/* themes/unthing/templates
```

and i added

```
theme = "unthing"
```

to my `config.toml`. Thats it: The page shows up unchanged.

So i started playing. I tried to have colors in my scss separated and only change the colors by providing that single file with the colors on the sites `sass/`. This doesnt work [https://github.com/getzola/zola/issues/837](https://github.com/getzola/zola/issues/837), a sccs and its includes seem to be a block which must be replaced alltogether or not.

Disclaimer
--

zolaschool is licensed under ![https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/](https://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/buttons/88x31/png/by-sa.png)

Commit message:

add a different base to overwrite theme

README.md, after:

zolaschool
==

Step 00
--

To start with zola the init command comes in handy:

```
zola init zolaschool
cd zolaschool
```

it creates the directory structure needed and a config file. I just pressed enter to use the default settings. After that i can run a server to deliver the pages with:

```
zola serve
```

if i visit [http://127.0.0.1:1111/](http://127.0.0.1:1111/) i read:

> To modify this page, create a index.html file in the templates directory

Step 01
--

So i did that:

```
cat > templates/index.html <<EOF
<h1>Something</h1>

EOF
```

and in the browser the page reloads without any intervention. Nice!

Step 02
--

Thats more or less static html serving - where does my content come in? The "index"-page is called `_index` in the content space:

```
cat > content/_index.md <<EOF
+++
title = "Anything"
+++
EOF
```

if i now adapt the template accordingly the title switches:

```
cat > templates/index.html <<EOF
<h1>{{ section.title }}</h1>
EOF
```

Step 03
--

More content files in the same directory are pages, the content is formulated in markdown with a meta data header surrounded by "+++". The syntax of the meta data is toml:

```
cat > content/nothing.md <<EOF
+++
title = "Nothing"
+++

Nothing
==

EOF
```

if i navigate to [http://127.0.0.1:1111/nothing](http://127.0.0.1:1111/nothing) zola tells me `page.html` is missing:

```
cat > templates/page.html <<EOF
<h1> {{ page.title }} </h1>
{{ page.content | safe }}

EOF
```

Which shows Nothing twice, once from the meta data `page.title`, another from the markdown part.

Step 04
--

Navigating back to the main page shows that i have no hint, that "Nothing" exists. I can add links to all pages in this directory. A directory is called "section" in zola. A section can contain multiple pages and we can iterate over those:

```
cat >> templates/index.html <<EOF
<h2>Pages:</h2>
<ul>
	{% for page in section.pages %}
		<li><a href="{{ page.permalink }}">{{ page.title }}</a></li>
	{% endfor %}
</ul>
```

Watching the browser shows that the "Nothing"-page shows up as an item in an unordered list.

Step 05
--

I want a subsection

```
mkdir content/things
cat > content/things/_index.md << EOF
+++
title = "Things"
+++

More things
--

EOF
```

The subsection doesnt show up as a page in "/" and manually navigating to [http://127.0.0.1:1111/things/](http://127.0.0.1:1111/things/) shows that section.html is missing:

```
cp templates/index.html templates/section.html
```

Step 06
--

The initial page doesnt show the subsections, we can add that ability:

```
cat >> templates/index.html <<EOF
<h2>Sections:</h2>
<ul>
	{% for subsection in section.subsections %}
		{% set sub = get_section(path=subsection, metadata_only=true) %}
		<li><a href="{{ sub.permalink | safe }}">{{ sub.title }}</a></li>
	{% endfor %}
</ul>
EOF
```

And i did the same for sections:

```
cat >> templates/section.html <<EOF
<h2>Sections:</h2>
<ul>
	{% for subsection in section.subsections %}
		{% set sub = get_section(path=subsection, metadata_only=true) %}
		<li><a href="{{ sub.permalink | safe }}">{{ sub.title }}</a></li>
	{% endfor %}
</ul>
EOF
```

Step 07
--

I can now add some more content:

```
cat > content/things/everything.md <<EOF
+++
title = "Everything"
+++

This is every thing
==

EOF
```

It will show up in [http://127.0.0.1:1111/things/](http://127.0.0.1:1111/things/).

Step 08
--

I want templates! This is the base for all my pages:

```
cat > templates/base.html <<EOF
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
	<head>
		<title>Thingieworld</title>
	</head>
	<body>
		<section>
			<div>
				{% block content %}
				{% endblock %}
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
EOF
```

Now i need to surround my html files with the extends & block commands:

```
for n in templates/index.html templates/page.html templates/section.html; do (
	echo '{% extends "base.html" %}'
	echo '{% block content %}'
	cat $n
	echo '{% endblock content %}' ) > x
	mv x $n
done
```

Step 09
--

I want some styling:

```
cat > sass/site.scss <<EOF
body {
	background-color: #444;
	color: #ccc;
	font-family: Lucida Console, Liberation Mono, DejaVu Sans Mono, monospace;
	padding: 2em;
	margin: 2em;
}

a {
	color: #e90;
}
EOF
```

Which is included by a headerline in templates/base.html:

```
<link rel="stylesheet" href="{{ get_url(path="site.css", trailing_slash=false) | safe }}">
```

Step 10
--

Special section / page handling is done when using _index or index files in a directory. An `_index` file denotes a subsection while an `index` file is just another page. A file like `a.md` is the same page as `a/index.md`. I created both cases:

```
mkdir content/a content/b
cat > content/a/index.md <<EOF
+++
title = "a"
+++
EOF
cat > content/b/_index.md <<EOF
+++
title = "b"
+++
EOF
```

The browser shows the links in different lists (i added header lines inbetween the lists for better visibility, see above).

Step 11
--

I enabled a taxonomy of "tags" in config by adding

```
taxonomies = [
	{name = "tags"},
]
```

into the main section of `config.toml`. Two templates to render taxonomies are needed:

```
cat > templates/taxonomy_single.html <<EOF
{% extends "base.html" %}
{% block content %}
	<h1>{{ term.name }}</h1>
	{% for page in term.pages %}
		<a href="{{ page.permalink | safe }}">{{ page.title }}</a>
	{% endfor %}
{% endblock content %}
EOF
cat > templates/taxonomy_list.html <<EOF
{% extends "index.html" %}
{% block content %}
	{% if terms %}
		{% for term in terms %}
			<p><a href="{{ term.permalink | safe }}">{{ term.name }}</a> ({{ term.pages | length }})</p>
		{% endfor %}
	{% endif %}
{% endblock content %}
EOF
```

and in `templates/page.html` i added a footer with the tags of that page:

```
<h2>Tags:</h2>
{% if page.taxonomies.tags %}
	{% for tag in page.taxonomies.tags %}
		<a href="{{ get_taxonomy_url(kind="tags", name=tag) | safe }}">{{ tag }}</a>
	{% endfor %}
{% endif %}
```

finally i added a taxonomy "tags" to `content/nothing.md` and `content/things/everything.md`:

```
[taxonomies]
tags = ["thing", "no"]
```

i added

```
	<a href="/tags/">all tags</a>
```

to `templates/index.html` and `templates/section.html` to be able to navigate to "taxonomy_list". I didnt find out a way to programmatically retrieve the url and thus hardcoded it to be "/tags/" (hints welcome).

Step 12
--

For search to work i enabled it in `config.toml`:

```
build_search_index = true
```

added `static/search.js` and `sass/_search.scss` from (https://github.com/getzola/zola/blob/master/docs/), added `@import "search";` to `sass/site.scss`. Finally i added the box to `templates/base.html`.

Step 13
--

I enabled code highlighting, this is straight forward in `config.toml`:

```
[markdown]
highlight_code = true
```

and adding a sample in `content/nothing.md`.

Step 14
--

I enabled feeds in `config.toml` with:

```
generate_feed = true
```

i did not see any entries (i even got a 404) without having a date like `date = "2022-01-22"` in one of the pages metadata. That correspondends to the doc and seems to be obvious. Auto detection if feeds can be achieved by the right header line in the html which i added to `templates/base.html`.

Step 15
--

The `robots.txt` can be templated and served from `templates/`.

Step 16
--

Adding a `templates/404.html` gives arbitrary Error-Pages.

Step 17
--

Themes arent themes :) - those are just base structures that can be overwritten by a site. Basically a theme is the same as a site, so i copied my site into a theme:

```
cd themes
zola init unthing
cd unthing
cat > theme.toml <<EOF
name = "unthing"
description = "A old school theme"
license = "MIT"
homepage = "https://codeberg.org/mdt/zolaschool"
min_version = "0.4.0"
demo = ""

[extra]

[author]
name = "My Self"
homepage = "https://me"

EOF
rmdir content
rm config.toml
cd ../..
mv static/* themes/unthing/static
mv sass/* themes/unthing/sass
mv templates/* themes/unthing/templates
```

and i added

```
theme = "unthing"
```

to my `config.toml`. Thats it: The page shows up unchanged.

So i started playing: I tried to have colors in my scss separated and only change the colors by providing that single file with the colors on the sites `sass/`. This doesnt work [https://github.com/getzola/zola/issues/837](https://github.com/getzola/zola/issues/837), a sccs and its includes seem to be a block which must be replaced alltogether or not.

Same works for the templates: I added a `templates/base.html` with a different title and while `themes/unthing/templates/section.html` loads it uses as base templates/base.html`. Nice!

Disclaimer
--

zolaschool is licensed under ![https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/](https://mirrors.creativecommons.org/presskit/buttons/88x31/png/by-sa.png)
